Hi it's time to learn about
a new way of structuring data.
This also helps in structuring classes.
You've seen some of the concerns with
the design of the GladLib class.
The design has flaws but
you still were able to add a new label and
create new stories, so the design works.
Larger programs with the same
flaws might be harder to modify.
You've also seen code account
nucleotides in a strand of DNA and
letter frequencies to
break a Caesar Cipher.
We extended this idea to counting
word frequencies in any file
with two parallel arrays.
To count nucleotides we used four int
variables to count each time a C, G, T,
or A occurred.
To count letter frequencies we
used an array of 26 int values.
One for each letter A through Z.
To count words you saw code that
used two parallel ArrayLists.
These contained as many values as there
are different words being counted.
Now you'll see how to use
the concept of parallel ArrayList,
to help understand
the java.util.hashmap class.
A new way to structure data.
Using HashMap we'll make it much
easier to modify the GladLib class.
The HashMap class is also very efficient,
compared to using two parallel ArrayLists.
We'll explain the HashMap class using
the parallel ArrayList class to help.
We've had a chance to see this code
that uses two ArrayLists to count how
many times each different
word occurs in a file.
The method .indexOf finds
the location of a word
in the ArrayLists of stings named myWords.
If the value returned by
the .index sub is minus one
then the string read from the file
hasn't been seen before and
it's stored in my words with
a corresponding count of one in myFreqs.
If the string has been seen before,
the integer value in myFreqs at
the same index is incremented by one.
This code works, but, using a HashMap
will make the code much faster.
And the HashMap class will make it easier
to modify the GladLib class as well.
Let's work to understand
the concepts in the HashMap class.
A HashMap object associates
keys with values.
In many languages this is called a map.
You might think of the key or
legend in a map as you can see here.
The key helps in understanding the map.
You can look up the color in the key or
legend.
And understand what
the color means in the map.
In programming the concept is more
mathematical than geographical.
The word map has meanings in both Math and
Geography.
The key in an element in the domain that's
being mapped to a value in the range.
In math, a function is
sometimes called a Mapping, and
this expresses the ideas in
the HashMap class as well.
In a HashMap, you look up a key, and
you get the value associated with the key.
In an example illustrated here,
we are counting word frequencies.
The word rainbow occurs 41 times.
So the integer value 41 is associated
with the string key rainbow.
in Java the value returned by
the call map.get("rainbow") is 41.
The value returned by
map.get("truth") is 17,
indicating the string
truth occurs 17 times.
A football occurs 23 times then 23 is
the value associated with the key football
as we turn by the call
map.get("football").
Wonderful occurs 23 times in
our hypothetical example.
The keys in the map are unique but
it's possible to have the same value
associated with different keys.
To use a HashMap you'll need to
understand the operations it supports.
We'll use one HashMap to replace
the two parallel ArrayLists.
Here is the code that uses one ArrayLists
of strings and one ArrayLists of integers
with the .index of function used for
associating integer values with strings.
The HashMap code also associates
an integer value with the string key.
The key in the HashMap will be a string.
The value is an integer.
That's the number of times the string
occurs in a file being processed.
To define a HashMap variable,
you'll need to specify the type
of both the key and the value.
When calling new, you must specify
the key and the value types as well.
The key is the first type and
the value is the second type.
The code will determine if the key
has never been seen before,
whether it's stored in the HashMap or not.
The method .containsKey on
the map object returns a Boolean
indicating whether that key is in the map.
If it's not in the map, the value
1 is put in the map with the key,
using the map method .put.
If the string is a key in the map,
meaning the string being
processed has been seen before.
The value it shows you if the key is found
using the .get method and then a new value
is stored for the key by calling map.put,
with an updated value of one more.
In addition to accessing
individual map keys and
values, we also need to access
all the keys and values in a map.
Printing the strings and
frequencies when parallel arrays
are used requires a typical indexing for
loop with the index used to access both
strings and integers as shown here.
Printing all the key value pairs in the
map requires looping over all the keys,
and getting the value
associated with each key.
The method .keySet returns an interval
you use to access each key in a loop.
This is similar to using .words or
dot .lines with the file resource or
URL resource to access elements.
Or the .data method to access each
string in a storage resource.
Iterating over the key set and
calling get for
each key allows you to print
the contents of a map.
Maps will allow you to modify
the GladLib class more easily.
But maps are incredibly fast too.
When files are large, efficiency
matters more than when they're small.
This concept of using efficient
structures or code is important.
Computers are so fast that simple
concepts lead to code that's fast enough
given how fast computers are today.
As you can see in
the first row of the table,
counting how many times each word
occurs in Shakespeare's Julius Caesar,
it's fast enough on a laptop computer,
even using the parallel ArrayList.
With a bigger file like the sayings
of Confucius, the code for
ArrayList is still under half a second.
Whereas the HashMap code
is incredibly fast.
For the novel the Scarlet Letter,
there are many more unique words and
total words.
But the HashMap code is still roughly ten
times faster than the ArrayList code.
For a large file, like the King James
version of the Bible with over 800,000
words and 32,000 different words, the
ArrayList code takes more than 20 seconds,
while the HashMap code
is under half a second.
That's more than 40 times faster.
Looking up keys in a map takes time,
that's independent of the number of keys.
Roughly speaking this means
getting the value for
a key in a map with a million keys,
takes the same time
as looking up the value associated with
the key in a map of just ten keys.
With an ArrayList you might have to look
at all million elements in the ArrayList,
so HashMap is incredibly fast.
In later courses you'll study how
the HashMap class can be so fast.
In this course you'll use
HashMaps in many examples.
Happy coding.